>> Richard Feldman: All right, let's
plow on ahead to part 1, Hello, Metal!
This is gonna be like Hello World, but
close to the metal, or a lot closer to
the metal than we normally would be
able to in something like JavaScript.
So, this is essentially just
gonna be Hello World but in C.
And what we're gonna talk about
in this section is not just,
here's how to implement Hello World in C,
which of course is very quick.
But also we're gonna get down into
the details of what's actually going on in
Hello World in C.
Because there actually are so
few steps between what C is doing and
what the hardware is
actually seeing that we can
actually just go all
the way down to that level.
We're not gonna go all the way down to the
hardware level and all the other sections,
but I did want you to get a sense of,
here is how close we are to the metal.
We can actually talk about the actual
instructions that the hardware is seeing
from Hello, World.
We're gonna talk about the performance
implications of being this close to
the hardware.
And finally, we're gonna talk about what
can we do to improve the ergonomics on top
of the basic Hello,
World that we're gonna do.
At first, we're gonna make
a slightly nicer version of Hello,
World a little bit later.
That's a little bit more ergonomic and
maybe more idiomatic.
Okay, so we got our nice metal font here.
Any Iron Maiden fans in the house?
So this is basically the close
to the metal Hello, World in C.
So let's kind of go through
the different parts of what we got here.
So essentially, this pound include here,
we're gonna talk about what the pound sign
means later on,
this is a preprocessor directive.
But basically this just means import
the contents of this library here.
So this is unistd.h, I don't know,
universal standard, or
something like that.
And this is what gives us this right
function that we're using right there.
Main is essentially a function
that returns nothing.
So, C is a type check language,
you do need to actually explicitly
spell out every single type
that you're saying here.
So you do always need to start by saying,
what is the type of my
function's return value?
So in the case of main,
we're saying void because we're basically
saying main is not returning anything.
If we wanted main to return an integer or
something, then instead of void,
we would say [INAUDIBLE] here.
Yeah, then we have the list of arguments.
So in this case, we're saying
main doesn't take any arguments.
And then, basically, this write function,
which is our 1 single function call here,
the number 1 here means we're
gonna write to standard out.
If you gave it the number 2,
that would mean write to standard error.
So these are hard-coded constants,
you could import a file to actually
use a named constant instead
of a hardcoded integer here.
But this one is so
hard-coded that it's actually pretty
universal that you can just write 1.
And also, one of the things that we're
gonna see throughout this course is that
actually in C,
you don't always see in idiomatic C code
necessarily people using constants as
much as you might in other languages.
For example,
it is actually kind of common to see
people use the number 1 instead of true.
C is maybe the original language that
embraces truthiness, among other things.
And they actually do not have, or
at least the original versions of CF.
I think there might be some C
compilers that support this today.
But it's still very common to see people
just instead of writing out T-R-U-E,
they'll just write 1,
cuz it's more concise and
C treats them essentially the same way.
So then we, of course,
have the string Hello, World.
And the 13 here is actually
the length of the string.
So when you're calling the right function,
you need to not only give it the string,
but you also need to tell it what
the length of the string is, or
at least how much of
the string you want to print.
So in this case, when we're doing
a hard-coded string like this, of course,
the length is really obvious.
But if we were using a variable there,
that last argument would allow us to say,
well, I don't wanna
print the entire string,
I wanna print a subset of the string.
So that's just part of what write does.
Also, as we're gonna see, the way that
you detect how long a string is in C,
it's like one of those things that feels
like this is kind of a 1972 thing.
Today this is not really
the choice that people make for
how to design your strings.
Getting the length of a string in C
actually requires going through every
single byte and
counting up all the characters in it.
So that's why, for efficiency reasons,
it's actually just saying, yeah,
just please tell me what the length is if
you already know it cuz I don't wanna have
to go through and
count all of that manually.
Okay, so next let's talk about
what the actual hardware sees.
So, this is gonna be the only section of
the course where we get into assembly
language.
We're not normally gonna be talking
about assembly language, but
we are, for Hello, World purposes,
gonna talk a little bit about assembly.
This will give you an idea of what people
say when they mean portable assembly.
It's much more verbose than C and
also kind of strange.
So don't worry if you don't completely
understand everything we're doing here.
The main purpose of this section
is just to give you a sense of,
here's what is actually going on
with the hardware, not like, hey,
let's actually learn
assembly language right now.
So this right here, this is essentially
a section of the final compiled binary.
So, when you actually run your C compiler
and end up with a binary executable on
your disk,
there's gonna be different sections of it.
One of the sections is gonna have
a whole lot of hard-coded constants.
So, if you ever imagine, if you compile a
single standalone binary that runs Hello,
World, at some point in those bytes has
to be the actual string Hello, World.
It needs to know how to
actually print out that string.
And so those actually do get stored in
a particular section of the binary.
So that's one section.
The C compiler is gonna compile
down the equivalent assembly,
it'll take care of putting that
in a different section for you.
Even though, when we actually wrote our
C code, we wrote that string Hello,
World in the middle of the main function.
The compiler is gonna say, nah,
I know that that goes in a separate
sort of constant section.
LC0 is basically local constant number 0,
[LAUGH] that's what that
abbreviation is for.
So again, the compiler is sort of
gonna generate automatic names for
things in the actual binary.
This offset, flat thing is basically
saying, at this point in the program,
we wanna go load from that local constant,
that section of the binary.
This part right here, this is
the actual body of the main function.
And this basically corresponds
to the exact call to write(1,
"Hello, World!", 13).
So this one function call actually
compiles to four different assembly
instructions.
And actually, believe it or not,
I have alighted some other instructions.
If you actually look at the real assembly
for main, there's some other boilerplate
on either side of this for
setting up meeting itself.
But basically JMP, right,
essentially means there is going to be,
somewhere else in your binary,
a function called write,
which is gonna be compiled in from that
unit STD library that we imported.
And JMP is basically, jump over there,
which means it's basically like a go to.
It's go over there and continue running
those assembly instructions right there.
Before we jump over there,
assembly actually will do a little bit
of prep work with these other things.
So you can see the 1 here
where mov to edi, that 1,
this offset flat thing was the Hello,
World, and then of course there's the 13.
So essentially what these four
instructions are doing, there's one per
argument, is each of them is sort of
preparing the state of the processor for
executing the right function.
So you can think of these as sort of like
they're writing to global variables.
And then when you jump to this other
function, the processor's gonna be, cool,
I expected these global variables
to have already been populated,
I'm just gonna go ahead and read them.
So these mov instructions are essentially
saying, set these CPU memory slots,
these are called registers,
it's the lowest level of memory.
So every CPU has a hard-coded
number of registers.
They're essentially, imagine if you had a
certain fixed hard-coded number of global
mutable variables that you could use to
have your functions talk to each other.
I know, assembly language is read,
they're almost great,
that's kind of what registers are.
So basically, this right function which
comes from that unit STD library,
that's actually provided
by the operating system.
So I don't need to mpm install anything or
an equivalent to that.
These libraries are basically just kind of
built into the OS in the same way that,
in JavaScript you have
the math is built-in.
You can say math.random, you don't need
to go install a library to get that.
>> Speaker 2: If there's a second
constant, where would it be stored?
>> Richard Feldman: If
there's a second constant,
it would also be stored in a similar way.
Basically what you would see is,
you would see a second section like this.
So basically, in the binary,
there's a whole contiguous chunk of
the binary that is gonna be for constants.
Each of them has their own label.
So, you'd see .LC0, and
then below that you'd see .LC1.
LC1 might not be a string, maybe it's
an array or something like that.
But all of them have
their own sort of labels.
And really all these labels mean,
it's like, from this index in the 1s and
0s in the binary to this index,
here's where the data is.
And this is really just one
of the very few abstractions
that assembly language gives you.
Is instead of having to have that
actual number here, it says,
okay, this refers to wherever that's going
to end up being in the compiled binary.
So you don't have to memorize the actual
individual [LAUGH] number of the location
within the binary, yeah.
>> Speaker 3: So let me know if I'm
getting off track, but those turn into
global variables, even though they
are scoped to the main function?
>> Richard Feldman: In assembly, scope
is not a thing, everything's a global.
At the CPU level,
it's like the CPU has this many registers,
that's what everything is.
Scope is the thing we make up in
software to make our own lives easier.
The hardware has no idea what scope is.
For that matter, the hardware
has no idea what a function is.
So actually back in the day,
you may have heard of procedural
programming as a paradigm.
That was because, at some point,
somebody came up with the idea of,
hey, what if we wrote our programs
around this idea of procedures,
this concept we made up, even though
the hardware doesn't know what it is?
And it's like, yeah, it's actually
a really nice way to program.
Now today, we think of this as just, yeah,
that's just how programming works, but
it's not how the hardware works.
So way back in the day, back in the punch
card era, people weren't necessarily
programming with procedures at all,
because that was a thing we made up.
They might have just been like, yeah,
I don't know, global variables, start
running the program, jumping around, just
go tos everywhere, that's all you need.
So yeah, at the lowest level,
you have no scope.
That's one of the many conveniences
that C introduces on top of assembly and
everything's a global, [LAUGH] yeah.
>> Speaker 4: So
the right function that we're importing,
that's tapping into an OS API and
not a C standard library?
>> Richard Feldman: Yeah, so
the C standard library, generally,
is your way of accessing OS level APIs.
There's a little bit of a distinction
here between Linux and macOS.
I don't wanna get too far
in the weeds on this, but
there's this thing called syscalls.
So one of the assembly instructions you
can do is you can say, run this syscall.
And syscall essentially means,
go tell the operating system, hey,
this program wants to do
this particular operation.
That is sort of a low-level operating
system primitive, and it's,
once again,
gonna have some sort of hard-coded number.
It's like, hey, go to syscall number 17,
which corresponds to writing
just standard out or whatever.
The reason that, for example,
in the case of macOS,
these are not actually
exposed to the programmer.
Technically, if you want, I mean,
you can make whatever bytes
you want go in the binary.
You can be like, macOS uses 17 to mean,
right, to stand it out.
But macOs actually officially says,
do not do that.
Don't compile to hard-coded syscalls
because we're gonna change what those
numbers mean.
So you have to, if you wanna write
a correct future proof macOS binary,
that's gonna work with
future releases of macOS.
They require you to use
the C standard library,
which they feel free to change every time
they release a new version of macOS.
There's also dynamic linking,
which we're not gonna get into either.
But basically the way that they do that is
they can say, okay, if you are calling,
if you're using this as the lowest level
primitive where you call right, and
that's all there is to it.
You're not actually hard-coding
the syscalls, then they can feel free to
change what those numbers mean and
sort of mess around with those.
Linux actually does guarantee that.
So if this were a course on Linux C,
we could actually go one step further and
say, at this point we don't do
a jump to write, we actually
do even more instructions ending in
a syscall to do the write directly.
Because Linux does have
a hardcore guarantee of, yeah,
if we said 17 means that,
17 means that forever.
And you can guarantee that,
because we're gonna promise not
to break that in future releases.
MacOS and Windows do not do that.
So typically, the way that people do it
is they'll use the C standard library,
which includes things like unit, STD.h,
in order to provide functions like write,
which are for our purposes as close as
we're gonna get to the metal in this
course [LAUGH] at least.
Because if you wanna write something
that's portable across operating systems,
that is really as low
level as you can get.
Okay, so one question you might have is,
how fast does this program run?
Let's benchmark it.
We don't really need to benchmark it,
[LAUGH] because the answer is,
at least unlike macOS, it's literally as
fast as the hardware can possibly run it.
You cannot make Hello,
World run faster than this.
What instructions would you
remove to make it go faster?
If you're using the operating
system abstraction of write,
which is, again, what you're
required to do on macOS and Windows,
there's just the bare minimum,
it's all there is.
You gotta, say,
call the write function in order to
actually print to the standard out.
And you need to give the write
function the arguments that it needs.
These are literally the hardware
instructions to do that.
Then, of course,
you need to string Hello, World itself.
There's nowhere to go,
you can't make the C program any
faster on macOS and Windows,
because this is all there is.
So this is a really cool example, I think,
of the types of strategies that we use
to get maximum performance out of C.
It's not that we're doing anything fancy,
it's almost the opposite.
It's that C is taking your code and
generating the absolute bare minimum
amount of assembly instructions.
Cuz remember, PDP 11, right?
[LAUGH] 120, whatever, kilobytes of RAM.
120 kilohertz processor, single core,
yeah, you didn't wanna waste any
cycles back then on things like garbage
collection and objects and whatnot.
So it is literally unbeatably fast.
You can make a programming language
that's more ergonomic than C, but
you cannot make a programming
language that, at least for
this use case, is faster than C,
it's literally not possible.
So now we are as close to the middle
as you can get, congratulations.
All right, yeah, and also,
the right function could be doing
stuff that could get faster.
But again, if the operating system,
as macOS and Windows do, is saying,
this is what we're providing you.
We don't have as programmers the ability
to make that go faster unless
you wanna fork the operating system
kernel, then you can go in and
rebuild the operating system.
Okay, fine, but
we're not generally doing that,
[LAUGH] we're making stuff that
runs in the operating system.